---
layout: postcard
location: "Bhigwan, Maharashtra, India"
latitude: 18.2995075
longitude: 74.7463631
featureImage: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/darbadar-postcards/images/1_flamingos.jpg
categories: postcards
tags: Travel Birdwatching India Maharashtra Bhigwan Flamingos
socialMedia: 
published: true
galleryEnabled: false
---

To the south of Bhigwan town—located on the border of Pune and Solapur district—is a widespread backwater formed by Ujani dam built on Bhima river. The backwater, a shallow waste water reserve, in some areas, doubles up as a wetland based ecosystem that attracts various species of migratory birds, most notably, flamingos.

The bumpinks that we both are, we went to Bhigwan hoping to only sight flamingos or as the locals call them, 'Agnipankh.' Little did we know that this nondescript place, tucked away in a village, had so much more to offer. Wrapped tight in a meditative calm, the stillness of the waters were only occasionally teased by a bird looking for a snack or a fisherman casting his net. Quacks and screeches and hoots, surprisingly, fell in perfect harmony. 

We watched Painted Storks, with their bottle-green, black and pink wings, strut next to our boat with a devil-may-care attitude. We gasped at the sight of Grey Herons gliding over the waters. And we watched Great Egrets pay their homage to W. H. Davies as they stood and simply stared at the horizon.  

An hour into the boat-ride, we halted 200 metres away from a sight that made us gasp, those pretty pink legs we had waited to see all along stood right in front of us – flamingos! Their poise, the delicious delicacy with which they turned those slender necks around, the sight of them stretching those exquisite wings and then painting the skies pink as they took off, had me convinced that a flamingo most certainly is a ballerina re-incarnated.