---
layout: post
title: "Pen: in search of idol makers"
location: pen maharashtra india
---

Harsha and I looked outside the window, careful not to brush our shoulders against the piece of chewed gum stuck to the edge of the window frame.The bus was wedged in a narrow alley between shops, carts loaded with vegetables, people, and open drains, all populating a claustrophobic space.It could have been any town, its appearance nondescript, but deceivingly so, as we would discover. 

The bus-stop was a few kilometers away but we got down early. As the *lal dabba*(translation: red box), a term used to describe MSRTC(Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation) buses, easily identified by their red colour, trudged along in a drunken stupor, we made our way across the road to a small workshop hiding behind blue plastic covers. 

The workshop, only slightly bigger than a closet, housed a bunch of rusted steel racks, their tops touching the roof and filled with brooms, paints and Ganesh idols, all jostling for space.  

We were in Pen, a town in Raigad district of Maharashtra, India, famous for its Ganesh idols that are sold in Pune, Mumbai, Nagpur, Pandharpur, and even exported to USA.
	
Like most of our travel plans, this one too hit us quite unexpectedly.

We started with talking about Ganesh Chaturthi, then about Lokmanya Tilak's role in re-inventing this domestic festival into a public event to promote harmony between Brahmins and non-Brahmins, [and somehow ended with wondering about the birthplace of Ganesh idols. ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ganesh_Chaturthi#History]) 

*<span title="Can we sit here and watch while you work?">“Hum yahan baith ke dekh sakte hain?”</span>*

*<span title="Yes, sure!">“Haan, bilkul!”</span>*

We watched in awe as he dipped his brush in black paint and drew the curve of the idol's eyelid in a single stroke. I don't think Harsha would have achieved that level of perfection even with a compass.  
	
*<span title="How many years have you been doing this for?">“Aap ye kitne saalon se kar rahe hain?”</span>*

*<span title="For 25 years">“Pachees saal se,” </span>*he said and spun the wooden disc to move on to the next idol. He was working on four idols simultaneously, no two idols being the same. Facing four different directions, they were all mounted on a wooden disc with an axle, the mechanism beneath it hidden inside the hole in the ground covered by two rotting planks of wood. 

<Photo of the man who painted the idols' eyes in the first workshop>

A woman in her late twenties sat some distance away painting the dhotis on the idols, occasionally looking up at us and smiling awkwardly. A 	seventeen year old gave finishing touches to the idols, coating them with varnish. 

We realized then, and confirmed that every artisan in that workshop and others that were to follow, worked on specific parts of the idol. One artisan would only work on the eyes, another one on the basic colouring, another one would only shade, and so on.  

*<span title="How did you learn to do this?">“Aap ne ye kaam seekha kaise?”</span>*

*<span title="I have been good at drawing right from my childhood days, used to win all competitions in school. I got a hang of it once I started working.">“Bachpan se drawing me achcha tha, sab competition jeet ta tha school me. Karte karte seekh gaya.”</span>*
	
After asking them a few more questions, we took leave and made our way through narrow lanes in search of another workshop. Twenty minutes into our search and we stumbled across another, this one being much larger than the last one. The moment we stepped inside, we were greeted by a rather curious view: tiny clay hands, fresh out of moulds, left to dry.  

---- Photo of the hands ----

*<span title="Are you from IT?">“Tumhi IT wale aahat ka?”</span>* asked one of the artisans busy painting Lord Ganesha's nails a bright red.  

*<span title="How do you know that we work in IT??">“Tumhala kasa kalala ke aamhi ITat kaam karto,” </span>*asked Harsha.  	

*<span title="Ritesh! Come here!">“Ae Ritesh! Ikde ye!”</span>*

A man, who until now had been tuning the radio while he took a break from fixing a broken idol, got up and came running. 

*<span title="Tell madam to come soon, the IT people have come.">“Madam la bolav, laukar saang, IT wale aale aahet,”</span>* he whispered into his ears with a great sense of urgency.

*<span title="Why don't you sit here madam?">“Ithe basa na madam,”</span>* he said getting up and flashing a toothless grin. *<span title="Will you like to have some tea?">“Tumhi chaha ghenar?”</span>*

*<span title="Please don't call us madam. And there is no need to get tea either. We just want to see how you work...">“Aap madam mat bulaiye. Aur chai ki bhi zaroorat nahi. Hum bas thoda dekhna chahte hai, ki aap kaam kaise karte hain...” </span>*

*<span title="Madam, our madam (boss) will come in some time...she will tell you everything, how many idols we make, how much money we make, how much taxes we pay, everything...our workshop is forty years old, we don't do anything illegal.">“Madam, hamari badi madam abhi ayengi...wo apko sab bata deyengi, hum kitna moorti banate, kitna paisa banate, kitna tax dete, sab...hamara kaarkhana chaalis saal purana hai, kabhi kuch lochcha nahi kiya humne.”</span>*
	
Harsha and I looked at each other in surprise. 

“Hello,” said a frail lady who had just stepped outside the house, the open space beside which was being used as a workshop, a yellow plastic sheet overhead serving as the roof.  

“Hi!”

“We just want to take a look...”

“If you will step inside, we can show you the records from last year, the number of idols we have sold, all our financial records...”

“We just want to see the artisans working, that's all.”

“Aren't you from the income tax department?”

“No...oh! We work in the IT industry, information technology...at least she does, she is a programmer,” I said.

*<span title="Oh! Uncle, they are not from income tax department. IT implies people who work in the field of computers.">“Oh! Arrey kaka, te income tax department che nahiye! IT manjhe computer war kaam karnare lok.15”</span>*

*<span title="Mahesh, you are such a fool!">“Kay veda aahes tu Mahesh!” </span>*

*<span title="I saw their cameras and thought...remember the last time when they had come and taken photos...">“Arrey! Me tyaanche cameras baghitle ani mala vatla...athavta, magchya velis tey ale hote ani photos ghetle hote...” </span>*

His explanation was drowned in laughter and the same voice teasing him: *<span title="Fool!">“Veda!”</span>*

We peeked behind a wooden rack overwhelmed by Ganesh idols, to spot the source of the voice. A seventy year old man sat there having a hearty laugh, spatula in hand and working on a clay idol, yet to be painted. 

--Photo of the old man working on the clay idols--

***
														 
*<span title="Trishna, I am pretty sure we would have reached faster walking backwards.">“Yaar Trishna, ulte chalke bhi isse jaldi pahunchte hum log,”</span>* said Harsha, sitting opposite me in the six-seater.
	
I stood just in time to save my behind from further suffering as the vehicle landed into a ditch, one of several that the entire stretch of the road was infected with. We were on our way to Hamrapur village, 7 kms away from Pen. After visiting several workshops in Pen and speaking to various artisans, we were directed towards Hamrapur village when we told them that we were eager to see the process of the idols being created from moulds. 

“Seriously! On a completely different note, I think my bum might have gone into a vegetative state.”

The workshops in Hamrapur were quite different from the ones we saw in Pen. Twenty feet idols were a common sight. As were hundreds of idols arranged in rows with military precision. These workshops looked more like factories. And unlike the workshops in Pen where the artisans appeared to be underpaid but happy, these guys strictly meant business.  

--- Photo of the idols taken collectively --

In Hamrapur, in addition to seeing moulds that are used to create these idols, we understood the process of their creation: a thin layer of POP(Plaster of Paris) is poured into a mould which is then covered with coir brought from Tamil Nadu. Once the POP dries, the idol is then extracted. 

---- Photo of the huge idol with its back open ----

Having seen all that we needed to, we endured another painful six-seater ride back to Pen. We would board a *lal dabba* after that and make our way back to Pune through the scenic Lonavala ghat.   

***

As Harsha and I sift through the images we captured on our trip, there is one that catches my eye: an artisan polishing a clay hand before he attaches it to the idol sitting in front of him. I can't help but smile at the irony: the man who supposedly God created, should now be creating Him.

---- Photo of the man working on the hand ---   