---
layout: guide
title: Kolhapur
location: "Kolhapur, Maharashtra, India"
latitude: 16.7084568
longitude: 74.1688274
categories: guides
tags: Travel
socialMedia: null
albumId: 72157660710608723
published: true
galleryEnabled: false
---
{::options parse_block_html="true" /}
<section class="guide-section transport">
### How to reach ###

* **By Air:**
Nearest airports are Pune and Mumbai from where Kolhapur is well connected by trains and buses.

* **By Train:**
Kolhapur is well connected to Mumbai, Bengaluru, Pune and Satara. From Chatrapati Shahu Maharaj Railway Station, you can take a bus, auto rickshaw or hire a cab to reach the city centre.

* **By Road:**
Kolhapur is about 450 kms to the south of Mumbai. From Mumbai or Bengaluru, it is an eight-ten hour journey. You can get direct private and state transport buses to Kolhapur from Mumbai, Pune, Bengaluru, Belgaon, Mangalore and Hubli. 

</section>

<section class="guide-section sight-seeing">
### Places to visit ###

* **Taleem:**
Motibag, Shahapuri, Gangavesh and New Motibag are some of the most famous taleems in Kolhapur today. Prior permission is required if the intent is to photograph the pehelwans or if one/more of the visitors are women.

* **Temples:**
Kolhapur is home to several magnificent temples, the most renowned of which is the Mahalaxmi temple that draws lakhs of pilgrims every year.

</section>

<section class="guide-section food">
### What to eat ###

If you like your food hot and two-legged(/four), we recommend Kolhapuri tambda rassa, pandhara rassa and roasted mutton.

</section>

<section class="guide-section shopping">
### Shopping ###

It would be sacrilege to go to Kolhapur and not buy a pair of Kolhapuri chappals.

</section>

<section class="guide-section other">
### Other things to do ###

Watch a performance of mardani khel – an ancient martial art form.

</section>
